Salamanders by the Sea: Modeling Site Fidelity of Spotted Salamanders 
Breeding in Rocky Cliff Pools
================
by Georgia Lattig

## Summary

The Otter Point Salamander project (unofficial title) is a long-term monitoring project that is focused on a population of Spotted Salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum) that breeds on a rocky headland by the Atlantic Ocean. This population is unique because they breed in a series of freshwater pools in the granite headland, so close to the ocean that the pools are occasionally flushed with full-strength seawater during stochastic storm events. The project was initiated by Dr. Stephen Ressel in 2015 with efforts to quantify the environmental salinities that these salamanders were experiencing during the breeding season. The study site consists of 16 different breeding pools in which salamanders have been observed over the years, varying in size and proximity to both the forest and the ocean. Our preliminary findings about the salinity characteristics of these breeding pools was recently published in the regional journal Northeastern Naturalist (Ressel et al. 2023, full citation below). In 2017, Dr. Ressel implemented a capture-mark-recapture (CMR) study to gauge the rate of salamander returns to this unusual breeding site. The addition of CMR to this study revealed that remarkably, the population was persisting at the site and even showing annual recruitment: new and unmarked salamanders have been documented each spring. 

In 2022, an exciting new aspect was added to the study by College of the Atlantic (COA) alum, Jasper White. The original methods for CMR were through the use of Visible Implant Elastomer (VIE) tags. To tag salamanders with VIE tags, we would inject a small amount of colorful, fluorescing polymer under the salamander's skin at the base of their tail. Unique colors were used for each unique year of the study, so, for example, if a salamander had a yellow tag that means it was initially marked in 2017. There are limits to this type of tagging, however, because we were only able to mark cohorts from a given year rather than uniquely identify individual salamanders. In 2022, Jasper implemented PIT-tagging as a method of marking individual salamanders. PIT tags are small microchip tags that are inserted into the body cavity of the salamanders, assigning each individual a unique barcode of numbers. PIT-tagging continued last spring (2023) and will continue this coming spring (2024). 

For this exploratory data analysis project, I had a few different objectives. Because this project has evolved a lot since its inception in 2015, data collection has evolved considerably over the years and has looked a bit different each year. My first objective was to organize, tidy and merge the datasets from each year and to come up with a standardized method for data collection for the upcoming field season. I did a lot of work identifying inconsistencies with the data and wrangling the data into a format that would allow me to ask and answer questions. While there is still some work to be done in unifying the data pre-PIT tags (2015-2021), where each observation represents a breeding pool, with the data post-PIT tags (2022-2023), where each observation represents a salamander, I was able to tidy and unify each of these subsets of data and I was successful in coming up with a standardized format for data collection for the upcoming season.

My next objective was to use what I had learned about data analysis and modeling this term to explore some questions about the behavior of individual salamanders in this population. I used data about PIT-tagged individuals from 2022 and 2023. The two questions that I focused on in my exploratory data analysis were 1) Do individuals show site fidelity to specific breeding pools across seasons? and 2) Can individual site fidelity be explained by variation in environmental salinity? I was interested in the first question because, while we already know that salamanders are returning to this site each year, we know little about their specific pool preferences. The second question naturally followed from the first because I wanted to know what variables might predict whether an individual showed fidelity to a specific breeding pool, and environmental salinity has been so central to this project and is what makes this population so different from others. 

To answer these questions, I decided to use logistic regression modeling to predict the outcome of a binary categorical variable that I created called `fidelity`. For the sake of my question, I defined fidelity as whether the individual was found in the same pool the first time it was found across seasons. My sample size included 96 PIT-tagged salamanders that were PIT-tagged in 2022 and returned to the site in 2023. Out of these 96 salamanders, 35.4% showed site fidelity acording to my definition of site fidelity and 64.6% did not. 

After splitting the data into training and testing sets, I created many different logistic regression models, exploring which environmental factors, if any, would be useful in predicting whether a salamander showed site fidelity to a specific pool. The most interesting findings came from my creation and comparison of two models which looked at two different aspects of environmental salinity change over time as possible predictors of an individual's site fidelity: **direction of salinity change** and **magnitude of salinity change**. The first model predicted fidelity from the salinity experienced by the salamander in the first pool that it was found in in 2022 and its interaction with a binary variable for the **direction** of salinity change (whether salinity increased/decreased) between first pool observations in 2022 and 2023. i.e. fidelity ~ pool1_salinity * sal_change_direction. This model had pretty poor predictive power, with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.5625. Basically, this model was not much better at predicting fidelity than a random prediction and can be dismissed as a helpful model. The second model that I created predicted fidelity from the first pool's salinity and its interaction with the magnitude of salinity change (how many degrees the salinity increased or decreased) between 2022 and 2023. i.e. fidelity ~ pool1_salinity * salinity_magnitude. This model had decent predictive power, with an AUC of 0.7356. Interpreting these results, it seems that considering both the salinity of the first pool observation in 2022 and its interaction effect with the magnitude of salinity change between first pool observations between 2022 and 2023 might be helpful in predicting the site fidelity of an individual salamander in this population. 

## Limitations & Future Studies

It is always important to consider the limitations of your analysis and I was conscious of many in my exploration of my target questions. I used a rather limited definition of site fidelity in my data analysis because my definition only considered the first pool that the salamander was found in each year rather than the pool that it spent the most time in each year. A future focus on this question of site fidelity should consider what the most biologically relevant definition of fidelity might be for this population, given that the salamanders do in fact move between pools during a given season. 

Another very interesting thing to note is that there were a total of 206 PIT tags deployed (given to salamanders) in 2022 and only 96 (46.6%) of those were recorded at the site in 2023. While survey effort/duration was reduced in 2023 and this could account for some PIT tag observations being missed, this is a substantial proportion of PIT tags which did not return the following season and raises questions about the behavior of those individuals. Another extremely important question to consider in field research projects which work with wild animals is the effect of our research and presence on the population. An important further study might consider asking about the effects of PIT-tagging on the behavior of salamanders in this population. Especially after the upcoming field season and once we have a second year's worth of PIT tag return data, it would be important to look at a variable such as length of time since PIT tagging and see if there are any significant differences in the behavior of individuals PIT tagged in 2022 and those tagged in 2023. Will a greater proportion of those 206 salamanders tagged in 2022 return in 2024 than in 2023?

## Presentation

My presentation can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/17C3VR7BxwCiNIXM_-rTdYIbv37W5zIO7mqMHEOGj8Ic/edit#slide=id.p).

## Data

These data come from a long-term monitoring project that was started by Dr. Steve Ressel in 2015. Over the years, many COA students have contributed to this project and have helped with data collection. Some preliminary findings from this project were recently published in a regional journal called Northeastern Naturalist (Ressel et al. 2023, full citation below). For this exploratory data analysis project, I mostly worked with unpublished data collected in the past two years by Jasper White (2022) and Wriley Hodge (2023). 

## References

Stephen J. Ressel, Emma E. Damm, Wriley Hodge, Georgia Q. Lattig, Tess Moore, Westly Reason, Judith A. Tunstad, Jasper White, "Salinity Characteristics of Rocky Cliff Pools Used as Breeding Habitat by Spotted Salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum)," Northeastern Naturalist, 30(2), 212-225, (29 June 2023) https://doi.org/10.1656/045.030.0207

## Acknowledgements

I would like to acknowledge and thank all of the research assistants over the years who have participated in this project and spent long, rainy nights at the site in order to collect this data. I would especially like to thank my advisor and the P.I. of this project, Dr. Steve Ressel, for teaching me so much about herpetology and field research. Special thanks goes to both Jasper White and Wriley Hodge for their hard work and dedication in sponsoring the past two field seasons of tireless data collection, and an additional thank you to Wriley Hodge for helping me think through data wrangling and analysis for this project. Thank you also to Laurie Baker for her instruction and advice; this project was prepared as part of her Data Science II: Programming for Data Analysis class. Finally, I would like to thank the charming and delightful population of Spotted Salamanders who have been both the reason for and the subject of this study. It is our sincere hope that the findings of this project will inform the conservation and careful stewardship of these and other coastal amphibian species. 
