README.md, before:

Salamanders by the Sea: Modeling Site Fidelity of Spotted Salamanders 
Breeding in Rocky Cliff Pools
================
by Georgia Lattig

## Summary

Write-up of your project and findings go here. Think of this as the text
of your presentation. The length should be roughly 5 minutes when read
out loud. Although pacing varies, a 5-minute speech is roughly 750
words. To use the word count addin, select the text you want to count
the words of (probably this is the Summary section of this document, go
to Addins, and select the `Word count` addin). This addin counts words
using two different algorithms, but the results should be similar and as
long as you’re in the ballpark of 750 words, you’re good! The addin will
ignore code chunks and only count the words in prose.

You can also load your data here and present any analysis results /
plots, but I strongly urge you to keep that to a minimum (maybe only the
most important graphic, if you have one you can choose). And make sure
to hide your code with `echo = FALSE` unless the point you are trying to
make is about the code itself. Your results with proper output and
graphics go in your presentation, this space is for a brief summary of
your project.

## Presentation

Our presentation can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/17C3VR7BxwCiNIXM_-rTdYIbv37W5zIO7mqMHEOGj8Ic/edit#slide=id.p).

## Data

Include a citation for your data here. See
<http://libraryguides.vu.edu.au/c.php?g=386501&p=4347840> for guidance
on proper citation for datasets. If you got your data off the web, make
sure to note the retrieval date.

## References

Stephen J. Ressel, Emma E. Damm, Wriley Hodge, Georgia Q. Lattig, Tess Moore, Westly Reason, Judith A. Tunstad, Jasper White, "Salinity Characteristics of Rocky Cliff Pools Used as Breeding Habitat by Spotted Salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum)," Northeastern Naturalist, 30(2), 212-225, (29 June 2023)

Commit message:

Update README.md Add data citations and acknowledgements

README.md, after:

Salamanders by the Sea: Modeling Site Fidelity of Spotted Salamanders 
Breeding in Rocky Cliff Pools
================
by Georgia Lattig

## Summary


## Presentation

My presentation can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/17C3VR7BxwCiNIXM_-rTdYIbv37W5zIO7mqMHEOGj8Ic/edit#slide=id.p).

## Data

These data come from a long-term monitoring project that was started by Dr. Steve Ressel in 2015. Over the years, many COA students have contributed to this project and have helped with data collection. Some preliminary findings from this project were recently published in a regional journal called Northeastern Naturalist (Ressel et al. 2023, full citation below). For this exploratory data analysis project, I mostly worked with unpublished data collected in the past two years by Jasper White (2022) and Wriley Hodge (2023). 

## References

Stephen J. Ressel, Emma E. Damm, Wriley Hodge, Georgia Q. Lattig, Tess Moore, Westly Reason, Judith A. Tunstad, Jasper White, "Salinity Characteristics of Rocky Cliff Pools Used as Breeding Habitat by Spotted Salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum)," Northeastern Naturalist, 30(2), 212-225, (29 June 2023)

## Acknowledgements

I would like to acknowledge and thank all of the research assistants over the years who have participated in this project and spent long, rainy nights at the site in order to collect this data. I would especially like to thank my advisor and the P.I. of this project, Dr. Steve Ressel, for teaching me so much about herpetology and field research. Special thanks goes to both Jasper White and Wriley Hodge for their hard work and dedication in sponsoring the past two field seasons of tireless data collection, and an additional thank you to Wriley Hodge for helping me think through data wrangling and analysis for this project. Thank you also to Laurie Baker for her instruction and advice; this project was prepared as part of her Data Science II: Programming for Data Analysis class. Finally, I would like to thank the charming and delightful population of Spotted Salamanders who have been both the reason for and the subject of this study. It is our sincere hope that the findings of this project will inform the conservation and careful stewardship of these and other coastal amphibian species.
